Improved Fetch Metadata defense section. (#51)
xsleaks/wiki: content/docs/defenses/opt-in/fetch-metadata.md

menu = "main"
+++

Fetch metadata headers are sent by browsers with HTTP requests. These headers provide context on how a request was initiated so that applications are able to make more informed decisions on how to respond to them. This allows servers to behave differently when they detect potential attacks (e.g. unexpected cross-origin requests)[^1]. This can be very effective against cross-origin attacks like XSSI, XS-Leaks, Clickjacking, and CSRF if a strict policy is deployed on the server.

In the scenario of XS-Leaks, servers have the ability to know when a request was made cross-origin (e.g attacker origin) and can return a different response with no user data. This response has no utility to the attacker since it does not carry any information or state about the user. Fetch Metadata can also be used to block framing or even navigational requests.

{{< hint warning >}}

> Fetch metadata headers will be only attached to encrypted (HTTPS) requests for security reasons.

Reviewer: This is a good warning! I didn't know this so thanks for adding it :)

{{< /hint >}}

## Fetch Metadata vs. Same-Site cookies

> Fetchmetadata headers can be used to extend the functionality of Same-Site cookies, both `Lax` and `Strict`. While both Fetch Metadata headers and Same-Site cookies can be used to reject cross-site requests only Fetch Metadata can perform informed decisions based on factors like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fetch metadata headers can be used to extend the protections of Same-Site cookies. While both Fetch Metadata headers and Same-Site cookies can be used to reject cross-site requests, Fetch Metadata can make more informed decisions based on factors like:
```

> * Was the request cross-site or same-site?

Reviewer: Isn't this basically what same-site cookies do? Maybe better to say:

```suggestion
* Was the request same-origin or same-site?
```

Author: Yeah, a typo :P

> * How the request was initiated? (e.g. fetch, script, top navigation)

Reviewer: nit to make the structure match the other bullet points

```suggestion
* How was the request initiated? (e.g. fetch, script, top navigation)
```

> * Was the request initiated by the user interaction on a website?

Reviewer: nit: Since it is implied that it is on a website? Or do you mean something else by this? In which case it might be nice to add a `(e.g. ....)` like for the other ones

```suggestion
* Was the request initiated by user interaction?
```

* Was the request initiated by the browser (e.g. entering the URL directly in the omnibox)?

> This allows for more reliable deployment of protections in scenarios where Same-Site cookies could break service's functionalities. One disadvantage of Fetch Metadata compared to Same-Site cookies is that the latter can also protect unencrypted requests (HTTP) while the former can't.

Reviewer: Since it isn't necessarily more reliable, just more targeted and more precise about how it works. 

```suggestion
This allows for a more precise deployment of protections in scenarios where Same-Site cookies could break service's functionalities. One disadvantage of Fetch Metadata compared to Same-Site cookies is that the latter can also protect unencrypted requests (HTTP) while the former can't.
```

{{< hint warning >}}

> In _Defense_ sections we often assume that the service runs on HTTPS, and therefore, the protection can be applied.

Reviewer: Just out of curiosity, are there other places we assume this? It might be good to call out where that matters since people might not know (and then we could drop this warning). I certainly didn't know about this one.

Author: Quite everywhere unfortunately (other mechanisms will be also only available for HTTPS since this is a new trend). I prepared this section to describe the Defense tables and will be using this section as a reference, since the sections don't consider HTTP vs HTTPS.
